# Masakhane Meeting Notes: 07/08/2020

- Time: 19:00
- Number of Attendees:  
- Notes taken by: Wilhelmina Nokoto and Lerato Louis

# Introduction

- **Jade** pops in, for a moment, to help set this weeks meeting host (**Wilhelmina**), up. She (**Wilhelmina**) briefly introduces herself, is warmly received then                proceeds to outlines the general structure of the meeting, bringing to our attention to Masakhane's expansion from doing **Machine Translation** focussed work, to **Neural           Language Processing** or _NLP_ in general. The areas that will be covered in this weeks meeting, being:
    - Updates from **Name Entity Recognition** or _NER_. Which we already have a number of people working on language and speech models for but welcome volunteers.
    - Our continued and ongoing efforts with _data collection_.
    - As a general reminder, the conference paper we submitted to the **EMNLP**, regarding our _Machine Translation_ efforts and are awaiting feedback on.
    - **Newcomers**, who may not yet know were to go or start, being encouraged to post messages on _Slack_ (https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/CNWEXUB17), on the Google             groups or ask during the meeting, for direction.
    - Announements - people who are planning on to **apply** for **PhD** positions in the **U.S**, encoraged to check **Graham**'s message on Slack: (https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/CNWEXUB17/p1596722692136600). The JRE fees and tests are waivered.
    - **Discord Social**'s - (As another general reminder) Our first happened on the _1st of August 2020_ and us intending to continue having them on a _monthly_ basis (https://discord.gg/sKCb8YA).

# Progress Report

- **NER** - **David** greets everyone, checks how many people have started with annotation and mentions that there are **2 new languages** (one of which is _Twi_ from _Ghana_).       He mentions that the dataset gathered for this language is relatively small (_about 4000 tokens_). He also mentions that we have a newcomer, joining us (**Dr Joyce** from         _Uganda_) who will be working on _Luganda_ with her students.
    - There are now **10 to 11 languages** being **annotated**.
    - _Amharic_ is now available on the Annotation tool, inviting potential annotators to join in on the festivities. This is, in part, to make it possible to measure the              _Annotators Agreement_. He shares his personal experience with a particular file annotated in _Yoruba_ , by highlighting the importance of this agreement, the quality of       the translation and how it could go wrong. He says he experienced _70%_ accuracy with one annotator and _20%_ with another. 
    - One of the challenges that come with crowdsourcing annotations through platforms such as _Figure Head_, is that it takes time and rigorous explaining to get crowd workers      on the same page, regarding things like task requirements and annotation agreements.
    - **David** - is thinking of creating _language specific_ NER channels, to hone in on the specific difficulties they face, to avoid unnecesarily repeating certain tasks.
    - **Seid** - As a newcomer, introduces himelf, briefly explains his background, commending all Masakhanean's on the great work they're doing and asks, whether the                annotations are voluntary or if they get employees annotating data. He goes on to explain some of the challenges he thinks volunteers will face (with annotations) with the      all the datasets. He suggests potentially paying volunteers to encourge greater interest. Potentially raising this in another meeting. He also points to the quality of          volunteer based annotations and the controlsand skills necessary to annotate and the number of ways volunteers can take, to cheat/ unintentionally undermine the process.
    - **  David** - Points to the past experience he's had with annotations, despite paying volunteers and points to the positive benefits for students within the community.
    - **Seid** - suggests getting Ethiopian masters/ PhD students to participate on the annotation task, which will allow them to do the task while building a model on the way       (which may improve the quality of the annotations while also providing participants with tangible benefits).
    - **Ignatius** - Asks (based on the annotation discrepancy challenges **David** currently faces) what the adjudication part helps **David** do. Whether  or not it helps           **David** find the discrepancies/ where the disagreements come from between annotators.
    - **David** - Says it helps improve transparency between annotators to see differences between annotations, encouraging agreements. **David** says this is possible even            if one isn't admin. 
    - **Wilhelmina** - Asks wraps this session up and asks if anyone else may have questions regarding any of the other languages. She then mentions that **Solomon** stated (on        the Slack channel) that he was prepaing a survey for a tutorial, that will come out soon on any subject that'll help anyone interested **Automatic Speech Recognition** to
       get started. If anyone in the community has a suggestion on specific subjects (or data) that they'd like to be considered in this regard,  they are encouraged to step            forward these.
    - **Tosin** - Thanks **Wilhelmina** for the update and asks **David** when the Zoom meeting for the various languages be, to allow them to iron out some of the challenges          they face with specific language annotations. 
    - **David** - Encourages them to have the discussion on _Slack_.
    
# Data Updates
    
- **Wilhelmina** - Speaks on behalf of **Musi** and herself, with regards to the _Khoekhoegowab_ data they'd scraped off of the _JW website_. She notes that they got **151 songs**, ran their models to get baselines and got some errors with running the **JoeyNMT** model. She suspets that some of the errors were due to the size of their data (being small). They went back to scraping some sites to scraping some data (and found a different bible based site, https://joshuaproject.net/languages/naq?#bibles and      https://www.bible.com/bible/548/LEV.2.KKG, to scrape more data). They are happy to announce they have **more data** and now have the **entire bible** in _Khoekhoegowab_ and in _different versions_. They are now training their models on this dataset to see how it performs. She encourages those who ran into some of the challenges they ran into and couldn't find data on their languages on the __JW website_ to visit _Bible.com_ for scraping purposes. 
    - They are _still sourcing data from the elderly_
    - The also have _more volunteers_, helping with annotations. She also thanks **Musi** for the hardwork they've been putting in.

# Initiatives/ Comments/ Questions

- **Forwin**  - _Newcomer_, introduces himself, briefly outlines his background and figuretively throws his hat into the ring. One of the he is trying to get off the ground, is    lauching a platform to publish scientific literature in African languages. He is reaching out to Masakhane for any input/ guidance/ information given the resources we have.
  - **Ignatius** - Welcomes **Forwin** to the house and explains how Masakhane came about, explains its composition and encourages him to visit the website and Slack channel.
      He explains that the community is for us to support ourselves, drawing resources from among ourselves. 
- **Allahsera** - will be giving a talk, tomorrow defending his _thesis_ on **Machine Assisted Translation by Humans-in-the-Loop Crowdsourcing for Bambara** and is inviting all    who can make it to please join in. https://rit.zoom.us/j/93484715170. His talk will be at 11:00 am EDT.
- **Ignatius** - introduces a _newcomer_, **Chiamaka**, who will be joining the _Igbo NER_ team.

# Other Notes

- Links shared during the meeting: 

- https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fjoin.slack.com%2Ft%2Fmasakhane-nlp%2Fshared_invite%2FenQtODM3ODA3ODE0ODIwLTAyYzg3M2E3Nzg4Y2I3NzgxNDg4MmNlZDE4OTBjMzBjMjg4NTcxMWZlYTg3ZDljMTU4M2FjOTk3MDVjOWM2NGM&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGNjFNyyutwL-wQso1gYPGCSXGevg.

Then **Wilhelmina** and **Lerato** stopped taking notes, but if anyone can help expand these, that would be useful.

    
