# Masakhane Meeting Notes: 23/04/2020

- Time: 19:00
- Number of Attendees: 
- Notes taken by Jade Abbott

## Progress Update For Newcomers



## Data

*Daniel W.* - Noise in the datasets, samples that aren't the right language pair. Daniel wrote a language detection API with more languages. Integrate for preprocessing. 
- Figure out what languages to be added.

*Ayodele Olabiyi*
- thank you for data.

*Wilhemeina*
- Shared Colab - has a small bug. 
- Needs some regex cleaning. 
- Got more data. GOt more songs from Ashuambo to convert to Damaara. 

*Bona*
- pre-processing. 
- Bonaventure = eSalomon Kabongo - 

## Project and Paper Updates

*Takalani NLP* - Julia says they're looking into BERT variants that work well on LRL. Kelechi had a paper and created a masakhane relevant paper list for us to add papers too!! Paper list [here]() 

*Bona & Chris* - Lots of ICLR questions. Workshop details will be communicated! Salomon Kabongo to mentor with regards to notebooks.

*Salomey* - Student, working on Twi - Ghanain language. Salomon Kabongo to mentor Salomey to get notebook working

*Senzo Dlomo* - Johannesburg. Software Dev. Interested in learning more about the community and would love to work on isiZulu


## Conference Updates

### WiNLP Deadline
- tomorrow! Everyone should submit

### ICLR

## Spin-offs


## WHy Masakhane seems to work:

- Salomon - open. feel a certain responsibility. feel motivated. something to do later on. no deep knowledge, get people to explain. 
- Bona - open, responsibility, friendly, ready-to-help. 
    => personally: lots of people. no response. 
    => responsibility. 
- Aligned goals
- Not profit driven.
- Only place is like a family. 
- Feel okay. Outside schedule. 
- patience, no assumption. 
- family atmosphere. 
- growing together. give there best. 

## How we feel about other organisations adopting our "model" and us all being grouped together
- Blessing: Err on side of caution. Still evolving. Still lots to learn. Too early. Detract from masakhane.
- Chris and Wilheimiena are worried about how being grouped with other entities could affect our ability to manuvre
- No comments in approval of being put under a single organisation. 
- Little approval about using us as a blue-print yet as we're still learning about ourself
