# Masakhane Meeting Notes: 16/07/2020

- Time: 19:00
- Number of Attendees: 13
- Notes taken by Jade Abbott and Lerato Louis

# Introduction/ Progress Update

- Jade - Welcomes everyone to this weeks meeting, outlining the structure of the meeting and encouraging everyone to ask questions, freely. 
         She briefly highlights the initiatives, translation models and datasets Masakhane has and may have previously focussed on, in part to help new comers find initiatives they 
         might like to working in. She also briefly touches on various papers that Masakhanean's have written and submitted to various conferences. 
         With EMNLP being one of the more recent submissions. As a sidebar, she mentions how one of the strongest initiatives running at the moment, 
         is Name Entity Recognition (NER). Also, that Masakhane is a great place to pursue ideas, learn and participate in.
 
  - She also encourages everyone to refocus their energy on the reading group channel, as conflicting schedules over the last few weeks 
    have unintentionally slowed this initiative down, somewhat.

- What to look out for - Dataset focussed funding opportunity from the Lacuna fund, which was put together by the Rockafella Institute. This should materialize within
                          the next few weeks and is a funding opportunity specifically aimed at funding NLP projects in Sub Saharan Africa.
   - The Indaba Fund, as another funding opportunity.
              
# Initiatives/ Project Updates

- David (For NER) - Apologizes for delays with annotations, but assures everyone that the Elise IE annotation tool is ready (as was confirmed on the 2nd of July). 
                    He has gone ahead with the decision to store the tool on a server (http://34.69.99.65:8086/), to eliminate user specific installation hang ups. 
                    This is also to allow him (and his team) to manage and compare annotations (since they have multiple annotators working on single texts, at a go). 
  
  - NER currently has 6 languages that have completed the data collection stage (Hausa, Igbo, Kinyarwanda, Naija Pidgin, Swahili, and Yoruba),
    Wolof is almost ready but their still waiting for the volunteers to address some issues with the dataset. The NER team hopes that they can get the dataset for Amharic, 
    Setswana, Luo and Tigrinya. He's hopeful that they'll have ten languages, with a few languages from South Africa.
  
  - Daniel - Who is a part of the NER team, was in the process of figuring out how to set up MongoDB, as a part of setting up the server, that'll host the annotation tool. 
   
  - Jennifer - Has a mini project on NER, and an accompanying dataset of unique African names. She's compiled about 7000 rows of names and is happy to share her dataset.
               Jade mentions the document we have compiling and centralizing all Masakhane datasets and suggests that she add her data to said list. 
               (https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-community/blob/master/list-of-datasets.md)

- Allahsera - Is in the process of writing his thesis in English (which is his second language). The feedback he's received was for him to add more detail. 
              He then asks how he should go about this, as English is his second language.
              
- Jennifer - Returns to call after a brief disconnection, to continue speaking on her NER dataset. Her dataset is currently stored locally, on her pc. She says it took her
             10 months to compile it and had intended to use it for autocorrect.
        
- David - Asks if there's an ongoing initiative on spacial recognition of text to speech. To which Jade confirms that there is on but that at the moment it's limited to 
           a group chat on Slack, under speech. Kathleen is working on ASR, on Luo.

- Samuel - Who is joining the group for the first time, this evening, is asked to tell us more about Elan and Praat. Turns out both are software that can be used to
           annotate data. His background is in linguistics (he's a masters student). His first language, Yoruba. His mother tongue, Yagba. But he can also speak Hausa
           but his focus is on Basa, as this is an endangered language. He's thinking of a way to create something that checks grammar and plagurism for papers written in Yoruba 
           Jade commends his goal then helps put things into perspective by pointing out one of the hurdles he might run into with plagurism. That being, needing 
           to have a plagurised dataset in Yoruba to train his model with. To help him get started, Shamsuddeen shared this link with him, from an NLP get meetup he attended: 
           (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2TZPrwhPhE) 

- Shamsuddeen - Is working on sentiment analysis on Hausa (a low resource language). He asks if there is any work where people are creating wordnet for low resource languages.
                David responds by mentioning a paper (from Dataset Nigeria), where the authors created a Verda dictionary for sentiment analysis Nigerian pidgin. He proposes
                that he create a dictionary instead. Samuel proposes using Twitter as a data source, and is asked to visit Twitter privacy policy beforehand and also work with
                Vukhosi.
 
   - Is in the process of applying for a grant (with an external team of 5 that are in the process of creating a sentiment lexicon in Hausa) and is wondering if it'd be possible
   to start a group with anyone else. To which Jade suggests that he create a post on Slack and the Googlr group, to help find potential collaborators. She also allows him to 
   list Masakhane as collaborators, for grant application purposes. 

- Orevaogheneahia - They're (AI6) working on dialogue systems for low resource languages. She mentions that she's thinking of gathering English datasets, then using 
                    Masakhane's pretrained models to translate to the respective languages and then doing so on postedit. To which Jade speaks on the Place Effect.
                    as a potential hurdle.

# Other Notes
   
- Links shared in the group: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.12450.pdf
- https://github.com/ajesujoba/YorubaTwi-Embedding
- Using wordSim to evaluate the quality of embeddings: https://github.com/ajesujoba/YorubaTwi-Embedding/blob/master/Yoruba/wordSim353_yo.csv
- Graham Neubig talk on Low-resource NLP https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=glIbcpay1-I&feature=youtu.be
- People to contact with regards to creating a sentiment lexicon in a low resource language: @Ted Peterson (on Slack)
- Channel to join on Slack, for Nigerian low resource languages: #wazobia (https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/CQGC70ZB4) 

Then Jade and Lerato stopped taking notes, but if anyone can help expand these, that would be useful.
