# Masakhane Meeting Notes 

- Time: 19:00
- Number of Attendees:
- Notes taken by Timi Fasubaa, David Adelani and Lerato Louis

# Introduction/ Progress Update 

- Timi - As one of this week's meeting hosts, Timi welcomes everyone, and goes through the following:
     - The typical structure of Masakhane meeting agenda (in part as a response to Daniel Dsouza's question), briefly highlighting meeting structure.
       Starting with announcements/ progress updates. 
     - He then encourages community members to step forward and volunteer to host meetings (should Jade or anyone else not be able to do so).
     - He also invites meeting attendees to include their NLP related areas of interest and the languages they speak in their Zoom profile's, to improve
       discoverability within the community.
     - He touches on the social Masakhane had over the weekend (Saturday the 27th of June 2020) on Discord, suggesting that more of these may start happening 
       once a month.
     - As a response to presentation/ speaking invites various members are getting, Masakhane is also considering creating a forum, consisting of members who will go out 
       and present their work.
     - Masakhane has also created a Slack channel called African-Tunes (https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/C014R89P069),
        with the channel's playlist here (https://music.apple.com/us/playlist/masakhane-playlist/pl.u-3evgTKga7l). The channel was created both for our enjoyment and 
        language processing/ translation purposes. Timi touches on this, while also encouraging that attendees to join Masakhane's Google group to stay up-to-date on Masakhane 
        related events/ activities.

- Questions asked: 
- Daniel - Asks how he could get more involved with the NER project. Timi briefly walks him through the specs of the project, for context (from David enlisting volunteers; 
            having a number of datasets that need to be labeled; to creating a dataset labeling tool. Timi then concludes by, suggesting the project should be more accessible 
            once the tool is in place.    
- Emi - Who like Daniel, recently joined the community, speaks on her openness to helping out where there's a need, while she decides what she'd like to focus on.

- Daniel - Asks how he could be of assistance when he doesn't necessarily speak any African languages. Timi responds by suggesting a few alternatives that he could work on 
          i.e. improving things on the algorithmic front.
- Tosin - Asked how he should reference, should he choose to use a dataset from Masakhane for projects/ papers outside the community. Timi stresses the importance of 
          figuring out whether the data is Masakhane's or if it has an alternative source. Seeing to it that citations are made for external data.


# Initiatives/ Project Updates

- David - Takes over from Timi for the second half of the meeting, and starts with providing context for the NER (Name Entity Recognition) project for African languages. 
That being:
    - This NER initiative has been under way for the last month. It's an NLP task, that focuses on identifying and translating important parts and figures of speech, 
      organizations, locations, dates and time within texts. To do this automatically, through supervised machine learning, requires training data. 
      This (training data) is something we do not have for a number of African languages, thus creating the need for this initiative.
- This initiative has a Slack channel (https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/C014U9NN2LR/p1593534928016800) that new community members, interested parties and volunteers can
  visit and join.
- Volunteers are asked to sign up, on this list (https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-ner).
- Ayodele - Who is already annotating a specific dataset with a colleague, steps forward and suggests that he collaborate with the NER team working on Yoruba, to extend 
            entity recognition across a more diverse list of domains.
- David - The annotation tool is now available and will soon be accessible online (to make it more accessible and to avoid installation difficulties). David then shared his 
          screen and held a live demonstration of the annotation tool.
- Jamiil - Showed appreciation for the tool then asked how it was that the tool was able to identify the Yoruba words which were likely to contain tags. He asked whether 
           the tool itself was strained and if there were languages it wouldn't work for. David clarifies that the tool makes annotation easier through highlighting 
           words that start with capital letters, between sentences. These words are typically personal name, organization and location.
- Emi - Asks how useful translation dictionaries are, in instances where languages don't have many parallel corpora. Timi responds, highlighting the importance of dictionaries
        especially in instances where languages don't have proper diacritics or proper marks, to have one source of truth. Emi then brings a project named Panlex to mind,
        (https://panlex.org/) where they have a large database of different languages and set up translation webs, to match source language words to English. 
        
Then Timi, David and Lerato stopped taking notes, but if anyone can help expand these, that would be useful.

           
