# Masakhane Meeting Notes: 07/23/2020

- Time: 19:00

- Number of Attendees: 22

- Notes taken by Jade Abbott and Lerato Louis

# Introduction/ Progress Update

- **Jade** - As is customary, Jade warmly welcomes all who are in attendance, laying out the structure of the meeting (which is as follows):
  
  - **_Intro /catch up_**:  Where we are on the project (Masakhane) > what's on our minds and what our priorities are.
  This is a good time for newcomers to get some direction on where to go next and what projects they can participate in or find a place to start. 
  - **_Announcements_**: partially based off of what's been posted on slack, throughout the week, to gently remind people to attend to certain things.
  - **_Initiatives_**: Our ongoing (in some cases, temporary) priorities. 
  - **_Open session_**: which is essentially ideas > things that people are busy working on and problems people may be experiencing. 
  For new comers, self-introductions are generally reserved for this part of the meeting, which is towards the end. 

**GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENTS** 

- **_Masakhane Overview_**: We moved (about a month or two ago) from just focussing on machine translation into broadly tackling Natural Language Prosessing (NLP). 
  We've now got an initiative for building Name Entity Recognition (NER) datasets, which David is leading and will speak on later.
- **_Speech Initiative_**: There's been some movement in speech. Solomon isn't in tonight but he and Hermann are slowly putting together something similar to what we've done for 
  machine translation (see the translation notebook). This is in part, is to make speech more accessible, with either of them hopefully giving talks on their work in the months 
  to come.
- **_Conferences_**: WiNLP recently happened which we had a number of participants in (**@Chris** and **@Bona**, among others), who did really well. We've submitted a paper to 
  the main conference EMNLP and are awaiting reviews.
- **_Upcoming initiatives_**:
  - **FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES** - A number of funding opportunities will soon be available for data collection and data creation, which we can apply for. One such opportunity 
    being the Lacuna Fund, which was spoken about in last weeks meeting.
  - **TRANSFER LEARNING** - This initiative is still in its infancy. More on it in the weeks (and months) to come. Jade is busy working on a notebook for this.
- _Potential starting places for newcomers_: 
  - **_Model Training_**. There are a number of videos on Slack which may be helpful to go through, where this is concerned.
  - **_Data creation_**: Those who are interested in getting into data creation should join the NER channel (on slack - https://masakhane-nlp.slack.com/archives/C014U9NN2LR). 
  - **_Model Evaluation_**: There's also the option to evaluate some of the work Masakhane's already done, looking at how well (or badly) our models are translating. 
    This is the focus of the paper submitted to EMNLP.
- **_Speakers_**: We've been talking (for a while) of rounding up speakers who could give talks to and for Masakhane. A nomination form has been created 
   (https://forms.gle/8aCCkTkKfDWTArGK8) and all are invited to submit their entries. 
- **_Competition_**: Interested parties are invited to write a Wikipedia article or translate a currently existing article into a native language, for the chance to win a new 
    laptop or tablet. This competition is aimed at decolonizing the internet by increasing the number of articles in African languages and on African topics, written by Africans on 
    Wikipedia. (https://www.goethe.de/ins/za/en/kul/sup/wessen-wissen.html). We're thinking of writing for South African languages, but this competition is open to all Africans.
    If anyone is interested in using our models to translate, this will also help evaluate their performance. **@Hady**, whose done a lot of work with Wikipedia has useful 
    guidelines. 
- **_Masakhane Shout out_**: Please see this lovely article (https://qz.com/africa/1881656/the-poetic-process-powering-machine-translation-in-namibia/) written on 
  **Wilhelmina** wrote on her work on Damara and data gathering.

# Initiative/ Project updates

- **David**- _Presentation on NER for African languages_: David prepared a short but comprehensive presentation on NER, which he shares with all in attendance. 
  This is to help contextualize NER, in the broader scheme of things (as a subtask of Information Extraction or IE and as a core component for question and answering systems 
  and search engines), explaining its role. The second half of the presentation is a live demonstration of NER in action, through demonstrating the functionality of
  the **Elisa IE annotation tool**. He opens the floor for questions at the end of his presentation.
  - **Korantema** - asks for clarity of the contextual applications of the annotations and gets a timely response from David.

- **Wilhelmina** -**_Data gathering initiative_**: They're still translating by night, on the cultural data they have, with both Damara and Oshiwambo. They're pushing for 10 
songs this week for Damara and have paper data for Osuwambo. They're hoping to get a vision to text group going, to make it easier to detect texts from paper
say through scanning. Regarding the JW dataset, they've gotten about 30 songs out of 151 (in Damara) and problem was having to manually alter the links due to
inconsistencies. They've submitted translated 30 songs for review with language experts. They have about 10 participants, writing texts (all immediate friends and family).
They also have 10 minute audios from the same group of participants, answering questions in Oshiwambo. They also have about 30 animation videos they worked on about 2 years ago,
which they'll also be extracting data from.

- **Julia** - **_OCR data_**: Makes a comment on a project she saw on hieroglyph translation, where they collected OCR data through showing participants the choice of the 
  character and asking them to draw it with the mouse. You'd get imprecise drawings of the symbol. There aren't digitized hand writing for it, but if there are unicode 
  characters, those would be a good place to start. She brought this up as she thought the approach to this project was interesting.

- **Bona** - **_Data collection_** - Chris and himself have since cleaned the dataset they have and are working on training a better model for what is now the bigger dataset. 
  They're running into issues with memory (as their dataset increases). They've tried reducing the batch size and embedding size (among other variables), 
  but they're still running into memory related issues that prevent the virtual machine from processing the data. 
  Jade advises him to share his code, on Slack so anyone whose available can help debug, as well as consider using Joeynmt. He also asks how he can create a website through 
  GitHub.io, and Jade volunteers to help offline. She also lists a number of hosting space options (including through Masakhane, Google cloud) should he want this. 
  - **Julia** - **_ hosting new model as a translation toolkit/ service_**: She encourages Bona to remember to allow people space to give feedback. Especially if model 
  She also encourages him to put a disclaimer out, stating the limitations of the model. (https://github.com/kevindegila/flask-joey)

- **Catherine** - **_Grant receipient - MT platform_**: They'd applied for a **Mozilla opensource grant**, for the purpose of building a machine translation platform for 
   Masakhane models. They were awarded the grant and intend to work on it for the next 6 months. @Femi showed interest in the previous conversation between 
   **@Bona**, **@Jade** and **@Julia**, and volunteered to step in on the UX front. They are in the process of fleshing the project out and determining the scope of 
   work. Jade, encouraged her to remember to take feature suggestions from the floor and she confirmed that they were planning to interview people on the subject.
  
- **Jade** - **_Transfer learning_**: She's in the process of building a notebook for transfer learning processes. This initiative is in it's early stages. 
  The idea is to find the best technique to train between 2 languages (that are similar) and translate those into English. 
 
 **Newby Self-Introductions**
 
- **Constintine** - _NLP for every written language_ : A professor at Brandeis University, which intends to create a tool for every written, living 
  language (which they know will take a few decades). His intention is to place an emphasis on building the tools to allow native speakers to make the models themselves. 
  His main expertise are in NER and low resource machine translation. Jade warmly welcomes him to the group.
  
- **Korantema** - _Data Science_: A Ghana based master of public health student, who is very interested in all things data science. She speaks Twi and is keen on working 
  on health related translation projects. Jade suggests she help evaluate the Twi model. Jade warmly welcomes her to the group.
  
- **Tekevwe** - Joined about a month ago, but now has more time to focus on this. He's just finished his undergrad. His dissertation project lead him to NLP, since he enjoyed 
it. It was on _auxilliary training for language models_ and is happy to share his project through Slack. Jade suggests that this could possibly be an opportunity for a talk.



- **Kelechukwu** - **_Update - unsupervised domain adaptaion_**: They've spent the last month or so on unsupervised domain adaptaion for the machine translation models, 
  with the intention of trying to make them more robust. They've made some headway in this regard are are in the process of implimenting and testing some architectural ideas.
  Jade also sees the potential for a talk in this regard.
  
  # Other notes
  
- Scheduling our next social (through Discord). Jade takes a poll and its agreed upon that the social will happen on the **1st of August 2020**.
   - Our Discord Server: https://discord.gg/sKCb8YA
   - Calender Event: https://calendar.google.com/event?action=TEMPLATE&tmeid=MTU5c2Q3MWk1OGxjZDIwaTJwZTh2N2Rxc28gdnBvaHRnM3RsZDlrNjFiZzdxaGZlM2Vsb29AZw&tmsrc=vpohtg3tld9k61bg7qhfe3eloo%40group.calendar.google.com

Additional links shared in the chat: 
  - https://africanlp-workshop.github.io/
  - https://pages.github.com/

Then Jade and Lerato stopped taking notes, but if anyone can help expand these, that would be useful.

