# Meeting Notes

- Time: 19h00
- Number of attendee's: 10
- Notes taken by: Jade Abbot and Lerato Louis

# Introduction

- Our host and founder **Jade**, sets the stage for tonights meeting, by welcoming all in attendance and outlining the structure the meeting will follow. That being:
  - **_Brief updates_** on where we are;
  - **_Announcements_**, concerning what may be on our minds and/ or priorities; 
  - **_Inititives_**, possibly with updates;
  - **_Open floor_**, where we talk about what's happening in the greater Masakhane.

- In terms of where we are, we are collectively waiting on feedback from **EMNLP** (regarding the papers we submitted), which should be given in the next few weeks, as their           deadlines are around the corner (_mid to the end of August_). 

- We also have a **_social this weekend_** (**_Saturday - 1st of August at 5pm GMT_**), which will be hosted via **Discord**. Jade encourages all to download the app well in       advance, briefly explaining how the seperate break out rooms will be structred and that there'll be music bots zet up in each of the rooms for us to enjoy.

- There's a **vacancy** at **Translators without Boarders**, for a **junior NLP Engineer** with experience with **Chatbots**, who preferably **speak French, Lingala** and/ or       **Congalese Swahili**.
  She notes how Translators without Boarders does amazing work, have always been supportive of Masakhane and sees this as a good signal that we're doing the right thing,
  given how organizations like Translators without Boarders can reach out to us to post these kinds of posts.
  - She mentions that **another junior vacancy**, for the **translation of African languages** will _soon be available_, from **International Research Group**. 
  
# Inititives/ Progress Updates

- **David** - He kicks this segment of the meeting off, with an update from the **NER (Named-Entity Reognition) initiative**. Annotation, is being done through the **Elisa IE       annotation tool**, with one annotator having done around 1000 sentences. 
  - The **NER tool/ platform** is **currently running** the annotation of **8 languages** and the team are expecting datasets from _Amharic_, _Twi_ and _Setswana_, among others.     David's **original target** was annotating around **10 African languages**, by the **middle of August** and is fairly confident this will be achieved. 
  - He also posted an invitation for Black in AI forum (in other languages) and will send a list of languages for which he (and the NER initiative) are looking for annotators. 
  - **Jade** - volunteers to spread the word, regarding the invition (across platforms - including the _Deep Learning Indaba WhatsApp group_).
  - **Shamsudden** - Asks whether there are annotation deadines to work within, to ensure that certain task milestones are reached within given time frames. He also volunteers       to help wherever he's needed within the initiative.
  - **David** and **Jade** - Both suggest there are, that they're phrased in part as goals, possibly attached to paper publications and conferences.
  - **Samuel** - asks how one should go about registering, to which he's encouraged to visit the NER slack channel (https://forms.gle/xpEryyY3KcapAJ2Z6).
  - **Ignatius** - Asks if **Kelechwu** and **Chris** are in attendance tonight, and kindly draws both to the Igbo_NER channel for them to coordinate a few things regarding the    language.
  
# Progress Update/ Data

- **Wilhelmina** - **Musi** and herself are making slow but great progress, getting more **songs** from the **JW website**. They've also been **cleaning the data** up and          **running** the **notebook**, to get baselines. It's still very hands on (editing the links). 
  - She'll also share the link to the collab should anyone wish to look at the code and find a quicker way to edit the links and get more data.
  - Of the data they have, their **parallel corpus** is at **30 songs** (the one that's really clean - pushing for a parallel corpus of about 70 songs). **80 are in _Damara_**     and **40 in _English_**. She says these aren't parallel enough and they're still working on the links.
  - _Oshiwambo_ - She has the YouTube link and saw that we have a speech channel. She has **about 30 short animations**, as **data** and a **number of volunteers** for the            channel and task.
  - **Jade** - Highlights that we may not necessarily have models for _speech to text/ text to speech annotation tasks_ , but that this should be a we add to the list of things    we're adding to the grant. She also encourges Wilheminah to boil the trnslation down to the number of sentences, rather than the number of songs.
  
# Other Initiatives

- **Julia** - Gets ready to elaborate on the **evaluation** work she's been focussing on. 
  - **Korantema** - promply asks _Julia_ to kindly speak on how she trained the model she used to translate the TED talk. She notes that she's new to Machine Translation and is     asking for perspective and clarity.
  - **Julia** - happily walks us through it. She notes how the models were trained by different Masakhane members who speak the languages. They collected and kept everything on    the _Masakhane MT GitHub_ and the creation of benchmarks followed this. Everyone basically submitted receipes on how to train the model. 90% of the _models_ are _trained in a    standard way_, using the **JW 300 corpus** (which, is a _religious domain_ and unintentionally creates bias within translations). But there is a global set of test                sentences, that are used to evaluate on and all the files that are part of the model are submitted with the benchmarks. Benchmark directories tend to have notebooks that are    associated with them, allowing one to possibly rebuild the model. Notebooks (and readme's) tend to have descriptions of the type of dataset used in the model. In Masakhane's    case, the assumption is that the default training dataset is from the _JW 300 corpus_. **Julia** goes on to 
  - **Jade** -  Asks **Korantema** if it'd be useful to put together an introductory talk to Machine Translation. And they continue discuss how modelling is done, the specifics     of Masakhane's training model and where **Korantema** and anyone else who may be interested, can go to find certain information on getting started              (https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-mt/blob/master/starter_notebook.ipynb).
  - **Julia** - Reverts back to her **evalutaion** update. For context, she (and those she's been collaborating with) needed to _find out how good the models are_. She found         that the best way was to give said the translations to native speakers and see how much of the translations native speakers would have to correct. They worked with about 13     languages and collected post edits. They now have _source sentences_, _translations_ and _post edit_ in TSV files for all the languages (in 2 domains, 1 for COVID data and       the other for TED talks). She invites anyone who'd like to do analysis the work, to please reach out (say through the Slack channel) and do best. Some of the analyses points     they're interested in are:
      -  What kind of words get replaced?
      - Which sentences are hard?
      - Is there correlation between how much a sentence needs to get corrected and sentence length?
      - Are there source words where the vocabulary is really specific to a certain domain? and what does the model do in these instances? Are there patterns on how the model           interprets certain things?
   - The files they've created also contain sentence level score (how much the sentence matches the correction, giving different evalution matrices).

Then Julia and Lerato stopped taking notes, but if anyone can help expand these, that would be useful.

# Other Notes 

Links shared in the chat:

- **David** : We still need volunteers for _Amharic_, _Kinyarwanda_, _Luo_, _Afaan Oromoo_, _Tigrinya_, _Somali_, _Twi_, _Zulu_, _Xhosa_, _Tswana_, _Sepedi_, and _other     Southern-African Bantu languages_. If you speak any of the languages and you want to help to annotate NER dataset. Please, join Masakhane on https://www.masakhane.io/

- Links from **Jade** related to getting started and some of the translation work done on Twi: 

- https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-mt/blob/master/benchmarks/en-twi/jw300-baseline/Salomey_en-%20twi.ipynb
- https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-mt/tree/master/benchmarks/en-twi/jw300-baseline
- Data here: https://github.com/masakhane-io/masakhane-mt/tree/master/humaneval
